### Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#intro)
- [Usage](#use)
- [Arguments](#args)
- [Output explanation](#out)

## <a name="intro"></a>Introduction

`sqanti_sim.py eval` is the final step of the SQANTI-SIM pipeline. In this step SQANTI3 is run and a report is generated by SQANTI-SIM to evaluate the performance of the pipeline employed to identify the transcripts. This mode takes your long read-defined transcriptome, the modified reference annotation and the reference genome used in the steps before to evaluate the performance of your pipeline.

In this step you are able to provide **orthogonal** data such as CAGE Peak and support with short read (that maybe you used to in your reconstruction pipeline) to generate also some metrics in the report regarding this information.

## <a name="use"></a>Usage

SQANTI-SIM *eval* mode usage:

```
sqanti_sim.py eval [-h] --isoforms ISOFORMS --gtf GTF --genome GENOME
                          -i TRANS_INDEX [-o OUTPUT] [-d DIR]
                          [--short_reads SHORT_READS] [--cage_peak CAGE_PEAK]
                          [--min_support MIN_SUPPORT] [-k CORES]
```

With the `--help` option you can display a full description of the arguments:

```
sqanti_sim.py eval parse options

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --isoforms ISOFORMS   GTF with trancriptome reconstructed with your pipeline
  --gtf GTF             Reference annotation in GTF format
  --genome GENOME       Reference genome FASTA
  -i TRANS_INDEX, --trans_index TRANS_INDEX
                        File with transcript information generated with
                        SQANTI-SIM
  -o OUTPUT, --output OUTPUT
                        Prefix for output files
  -d DIR, --dir DIR     Directory for output files (default: .)
  --short_reads SHORT_READS
                        File Of File Names (fofn, space separated) with paths
                        to FASTA or FASTQ from Short-Read RNA-Seq. If
                        expression or coverage files are not provided,
                        Kallisto (just for pair-end data) and STAR,
                        respectively, will be run to calculate them.
  --cage_peak CAGE_PEAK
                        FANTOM5 Cage Peak (BED format, optional)
  --min_support MIN_SUPPORT
                        Minimum number of supporting reads for an isoform
  -k CORES, --cores CORES
                        Number of cores to run in parallel
```

Running the tool with the minimum input to simulate PacBio reads will look as follows:

```
(SQANTI-SIM.env)$ python sqanti_sim.py eval \
			--isoforms long_read_transcriptome.gtf \
			--trans_index prefix_index.tsv \
			--gtf modified_reference_annotation.gtf \
			--genome reference_genome.fasta \
```

# TODO

## <a name="args"></a>Arguments detailed explanation

### Required input

These are the minimal parameters you will need to run `sqanti_sim.py classif`:

- **Transcript index** file (`-i`): This file is the *prefix_index.tsv* file generated in the previus *preparatory* step. New columns and information will be add to this file, so you should track it and use the most updated version of this file in the next steps of the SQANTI-SIM pipeline.
- **Reference annotation** in GTF format (`--gtf`): This file must be the same as the one used in the *classif* and *preparatory* steps so the transcript names and references match properly. An example of reference transcriptome and it required format is [GENCODE](https://www.gencodegenes.org/).
- **Reference genome** in FASTA format (`--genome`): This is the reference genome in FASTA format.
- **Long-read sequencing platform** (`--pb/--ont`): Decide whether simulate PacBio reads using IsoSeqSim simulator or ONT reads with NanoSim simulator. You can choose how many reads simulate with `--long_count`, if not used it will use the values from the "requested_counts" column from the index file. If `--long_count` is used the value of total simulate reads will not be exact, the number of total reads is used to multiply the requested TPM to decide how many reads simulate for each different transcript.

### Optional input

- **Illumina reads** simulation (`--illumina`): If used you will also simulate Ilumina RNA-seq reads with Polyester simulator. You can choose how many reads simulate with `--short_count`, if not used it will use the values from the "requested_counts" column from the index file.
- **Output directory**(`-d`): Output directory for output files. SQANTI-SIM will use the directory where the script was run as the default output directory.
- **Parallelization**(`-k`): Number of cores to run in parallel. Most of the SQANTI-SIM modes have code chunks that can be run in parallel, however the default option is to run SQANTI-SIM in one single thread.

## <a name="out"></a>Output explanation

#### ONT_simulated.fastq or PacBio_simulated.fasta

FASTQ or FASTA file of simulated long-reads. The header of the reads looks like the following:

```
# ONT reads
@ENST00000686945_ONT_simulated_read_1229

# PacBio reads
>ENST00000379236_PacBio_simulated_read_1229
```

The information before the first `_` in the reference transcript name from which the read cames from. The it is written the platform from which you are simulating (`ONT_simulated_read` or `PacBio_simulated_read`)  and the total read count of simulated read, meaning this read was the simulated read number `1230` (the count starts in 0).

#### {ONT,PacBio}_simulated.read_to_isoform.tsv

This is a tab-separated file with two columns and no header. In the first column we have all the reads names and in the second column the reference transcript name from which that specific read was simulated from. This information is kinda redundant because we can find the reference transcript in the header of the read.

#### Illumina_simulated_{1,2}.fasta

Fasta file of simulated Illumina RNA-seq reads. The header format is the same as the one given by the Polyester simulator.

#### prefix_index.tsv

This is the main index file with the structural annotation of the reference transcripts. This file will be requested and modified in each other SQANTI-SIM mode. It must be parsed using `-i/--trans_index`. After running the SQANTI-SIM *classif* mode this file will contain the potential structural category of each transcript. The columns of the *prefix_index.tsv* file are described below:

1. **transcript_id**: The transcript id of the query transcript taken from the reference annotation.
2. **gene_id**: The reference gene where this transcript comes from.
3. **structural_category**: The potential structural category in which this transcript could be classified if simulated as novel.
4. **associated_gene**: The reference gene that confers the structural category to the query transcript. If there are more than one associated gene they will be written separated by "_", e.g., *Gene1_Gene2_Gene3*.
5. **associated_trans**: The reference transcript name hat confers the structural category. If there is not an specifica associated transcript, "novel" will appear instead.
6. **chrom**: Chromosome.
7. **strand**: Strand.
8. **exons**: Number of exons.
9. **donors**: End of the junction (if - strand it will be the start of the junction). Values are 1-based.
10. **acceptors**: Start of the junction (if - strand it will be the end of the junction). Values are 1-based.
11. **TSS_genomic_coord**: Start site of the transcript. Values are 1-based.
12. **TTS_genomic_coord**: Termination site of the transcript. Values are 1-based.
13. **sim_type**: If the transcript is present in the modified reference annotation (*known*) or not (*novel*).
14. **requested_counts**: The requested reads to simulate in the *sim* step.
15. **requested_tpm**: The requested TPM value to simulate in the *sim* step.
16. **sim_counts**: The number of simulated long-reads.
17. **illumina_counts**: The numer of simulated short-reads.

#### Other output generated by default by the simulators

- **ONT_simulated_aligned_error_profile**: Contains all the information of error introduced into each read.
- **ONT_simulated_aligned_reads.fastq**: Contains all aligned reads. In SQANTI-SIM, all simulated reads.
- **ONT_simulated_unaligned_reads.fastq**: Contains all unaligned reads. NanoSim was adapted in SQANTI-SIM so all the simulated reads are aligned reads.
- **PacBio_simulated.tsv**: Structural annotation of each reference transcript and the number of reads simulated of each one.
- **temp_isoseqsim**: Temporary directory for IsoSeqSim simulation.
